📘 Task 3: Explore Docker Terminologies and Components
🧩 Key Docker Terminologies
1. Image
Think of an image like a blueprint or recipe for your application. It contains everything needed to run your app: the code, libraries, dependencies, 
settings, and even the OS environment.

Example: You might have a Python app, so you build a Docker image that includes Python, your app code, and any packages it needs.

2. Container
. A container is like a running instance of an image. Once you start an image, it becomes a container.
. Imagine you're baking a cake using a recipe (the image). The cake you bake (the actual product) is the container.
. Containers are lightweight, portable, and isolated—meaning your app runs the same on any machine.

3. Dockerfile
. This is a text file with step-by-step instructions on how to build a Docker image.
. It’s like writing down your cake recipe: what ingredients (base image, packages) to use, how to prepare them (install dependencies), and what to do when it’s ready (run the app).

Example:

Dockerfile

FROM python:3.10
COPY . /app
WORKDIR /app
RUN pip install -r requirements.txt
CMD ["python", "app.py"]

4. Volume
. Volumes are like external storage for containers. Containers are temporary—if they’re deleted, their data is gone too. Volumes keep data safe and persistent.
. You use volumes when you want to save things like logs, databases, or user uploads outside the container.

5. Network
. Docker networks allow containers to communicate with each other.
. Think of each container as a person in a room. A Docker network is the Wi-Fi that connects them so they can talk.

Example: A web app container can connect to a database container through a shared Docker network.

🛠️ Main Docker Components & How They Work Together
1. Docker Engine
. This is the core of Docker. It's the technology that lets you build and run containers. It includes:
. Docker Daemon (dockerd) – The background service that manages containers.

Docker CLI (docker) – 
. The command-line tool you use to talk to Docker (e.g., docker run, docker build).

REST API 
. Allows programs to talk to Docker programmatically (e.g., GUIs or tools like Portainer).
. Think of Docker Engine as the heart that pumps life into everything. You type commands, the engine makes it happen.

Docker Hub
. Docker Hub is a cloud-based registry where people store and share Docker images.
. It’s like GitHub, but for Docker images. You can download images (like nginx, mysql, etc.) or upload your own.
. Example: docker pull nginx downloads the official NGINX image from Docker Hub.

Docker Images
. As mentioned earlier, these are the templates used to build containers. You usually build them using a Dockerfile, and optionally publish them to Docker Hub.

Containers
. These are the running applications created from Docker images. Each container is isolated, but you can link them through networks or share files using volumes.

Docker Compose
. A tool that lets you define and run multi-container applications with one simple file (docker-compose.yml).
. Great for when your app has multiple parts, like a frontend, backend, and database.


. How They All Work Together
1. You write a Dockerfile to define how your app should run.

2. You build a Docker image from that file using docker build.

3. You start a container from the image using docker run.

4. If needed, you use volumes to store data, and networks to connect containers.

5. You can upload your image to Docker Hub to share or deploy elsewhere.

6. Docker Engine handles everything behind the scenes to make this work.

